
---
title: "A deep transfer learning approach for improved post-traumatic stress disorder diagnosis"
collection: publications
permalink: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8622447
excerpt: 'Human voice could be significantly affected by neoplasm, vocal palsy, and phono-trauma diseases. Computer aided diagnosis by analyzing human voice can be a remote and cost-effective tool for patients around the world. In this paper, we propose a deep transfer learning approach to differentiate pathological voice samples from normal ones. We utilize voice samples recorded from 200 patients at the Far Eastern Memorial Hospital (FEMH) to develop the deep transfer learning model. We extract prosodic, vocal tract and excitation features as new representations from the voice samples for diagnosis. To address the small data set challenge, we utilize the TIMIT dataset and develop a transfer learning approach in which a deep belief network (DBN) is first trained with the TIMIT data set. The trained model is then applied to the FEMH data set as a feature extractor. Finally, we train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier with the extracted features for diagnosis. We evaluate our approach using the leave one out cross validation (LOOCV) strategy on the 200 training patients, and achieve 94.90% sensitivity with 59.77% un-weighted average recall (UAR) for the 400 FEMH testing pati'
date: 2018-12
venue: 'In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 11-20. IEEE, 2017 New Orleans, LA, USA'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel7/8211002/8215462/08215473.pdf'
citation: 'K. A. Islam, D. Perez and J. Li, "A Transfer Learning Approach for the 2018 FEMH Voice Data Challenge," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Seattle, WA, USA, 2018, pp. 5252-5257'
---
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a traumatic-stressor related disorder developed by exposure to a traumatic or adverse environmental event that caused serious harm or injury. Structured interview is the only widely accepted clinical practice for PTSD diagnosis but suffers from several limitations including the stigma associated with the disease. Diagnosis of PTSD patients by analyzing speech signals has been investigated as an alternative since recent years, where speech signals are processed to extract frequency features and these features are then fed into a classification model for PTSD diagnosis. In this paper, we developed a deep belief network (DBN) model combined with a transfer learning (TL) strategy for PTSD diagnosis. We computed three categories of speech features and utilized the DBN model to fuse these features. 

[Download paper here](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8622447)

Recommended citation: Banerjee, Debrup, Kazi Islam, Gang Mei, Lemin Xiao, Guangfan Zhang, Roger Xu, Shuiwang Ji, and Jiang Li. "A Deep Transfer Learning Approach for Improved Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Diagnosis." In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 11-20. IEEE, 2017..
